---
layout: post
title:  'Scafell Pike Caldera: flow through time'
---

Volcanoes and caves have more in common than you might think. Yes, one of them kicks out lots of deadly hot gases and chunks of rock, generating a lot of stress if you happen to be in the vicinity, while the other can provide excellent hangover relief when you're wallowing and splashing your way through a cooling underground streamway (I definitely wouldn't want to be hungover in the midst of a volcanic eruption). But both systems are controlled by underground plumbing and drainage that is hard to accurately visualise, because both involve anisotropic (directionally variable) ground conditions that are very challenging to study and mostly impossible to access (the cave passages explored by humans are a very small proportion of the flowpaths taken by underground water in karst systems).

They also both involve complex processes of sediment transport, the main difference being that in caves the water transporting the sediment is confined to the cave passage dimensions, which can lead to interesting passage shapes by a process known as paragenesis. By contrast, volcanic flows are rarely confined at all and can surmount considerable topographic highs, mostly because they are formed of mixtures of solid particles and hot gases moving at far higher speeds. Volcanism in the UK is long since over due to the lack of proximity to tectonic plate boundaries, the only places where the crust is locally thin enough for molten magma to rise to near the surface buoyantly. However, around 450 million years ago the UK's western edge was a long chain of volcanic centres, one of the largest of these being the Scafell Pike Caldera Complex. This area is a true gift for anyone interested in terrestrial flow deposits: it is possible to see deposits of both fluvial (similar to caves but less confined) and volcanic flows side by side, along with the remnants of glacial flow. Around the Scafell Pike Caldera, flow is everywhere.

It's also possible to find flow in your mind: when you are fully absorbed in the activity at hand, and other psychological distractions fall away, many have described entering a state of pure experience, whose effects are long-lasting and generally hit home after the activity is complete. I'm not going to get too philosophical, but if you want to then there are some interesting discussions about this in the climbing community. One of my favourite places for very listenable insight into this stuff is the [Factor Two podcast](https://www.wiltreasure.co.uk/factor-two) from Wil Treasure. Climbing and fell running has facilitated me entering a flow state in the past, as has research on occasion (usually if a deadline is approaching!) and practicing and listening to music. 

Although not essential, I find being outdoors really helps me to disconnect from other worries and stresses (OK, there is internet connection at many 'wild' places in the UK now, but not in caves!). I guess what I'm trying to say is that the outdoors allows you to push yourself and be inquisitive, without having to worry about being productive in a typical sense. Some friends and I had a great time one weekend doing just that in the Lake District, which I'm going to describe geologically (hopefully not too boring!) and also in terms of meaningful but playful connection to an iconic and historic environment.

<hr color='lightgray'>

The walk up from New Dungeon Ghyll was as crowded as you would expect from a sunny August Bank Holiday weekend, a little colony of ants snaking their way up the side of the hill toward Stickle Tarn. 

I was never especially gripped by igneous petrology (the study of the minerals found in rocks from cooled volcanic rocks) during my undergraduate degree. I think part of this might be to do with a lack of ability to focus my eyes when looking down microscopes. In any case, the deposits produced when volcanoes erupt explosively aren't the kind that produce trippy kaleidoscope visuals when looked at in cross-polarised light. They are often mostly grey with a lot of poorly sorted angular shards. Menacing, but in a boring way, like a bailiff. However,  I have always been captivated by the sediments that are ejected from volcanoes when they erupt. These sedimentary deposits can take infinite diff form lethal flows, pyroclastic flows if they co